Description of StorageGRID Webscale
===================================

NetApp StorageGRID Webscale (SGWS) is an Object Storage platform which
is flexible and highly scalable while supporting multiple RESTful APIs
for storing and managing data. SGWS Version 10.2 contains new features
to provide customers with more options in deploying Object Storage that
are compatible with the OpenStack platform.

NetApp StorageGRID Webscale is a software-defined object-based storage
platform that provides intelligent policy-driven data management. The
ability to manage data while optimizing durability, protection,
performance, and even physical placement across multiple geographies is
key to meeting business requirements while driving cost savings.

Starting with SGWS 10.2, support is provided for deploying a Grid with
OpenStack and Heat on the KVM hypervisor. As well, StorageGRID Webscale
10.2 supports the Swift API so that applications and client software can
ingest and retrieve data from SGWS 10.2 via the Swift RESTful API.

Assuming that the OpenStack deployment is configured to make use of the
NetApp Cinder drivers and NetApp storage, StorageGRID Webscale customers
can be confident they are building on a rock-solid foundation for their
web data repositories, data archives, and media repositories.

**Efficient, Durable, and Flexible.**

Drive cost savings without sacrificing durability with NetApp
StorageGRID Webscale’s hierarchical erasure coding. Protecting at the
node level and with geo-distributed coding, customers can create
policy-driven data protection with multiple levels of granularity. They
can choose a combination of full copies and/or geo-distributed coded
copies to balance performance needs and cost savings between different
sets of data or during the object’s lifecycle.

**Enable the Hybrid Cloud.**

Achieve new levels of cost savings by enabling cloud-to-cloud data
management. StorageGRID Webscale can manage and store objects not only
within its own globally distributed infrastructure but also in Amazon
Web Services (AWS). Customers can add AWS S3 storage as a storage tier,
realizing additional data protection with an external cloud while
driving cost savings by performing more expensive operations against
locally managed copies.

**Designed for Always-On Operations.**

NetApp StorageGRID Webscale provides the foundation for global data
availability anytime, anywhere, to facilitate nonstop operations.
Configurations can be designed for resilience to one or multiple
simultaneous failures, even to entire site losses and regional
disasters. StorageGRID Webscale is suitable for single data centers or
multi–data center deployments with many sites across the globe.
StorageGRID Webscale is built upon a modular architecture, allowing
customers to design grids to maximize throughput and capacity.
Installation is managed by a centralized process that maintains
configuration control and speeds deployments. Nodes, storage, and even
entire sites can be added and removed from the grid without disruption.
