.. _ef-series:

Description of E-Series and EF-Series Systems
=============================================

The family of E-series and EF-series systems provides
performance-efficient, high-density block storage aimed primarily at
application-driven workloads.

NetApp E-Series systems are designed to provide:

-  Simple, low-touch administration

-  Flexible, reliable SAN storage

-  Extreme capacity and density

-  High performance GB/s or IOPS

-  Performance, power, and space efficiency

-  Consistent, low latency

-  Consistently high IOPS and throughput

-  Enterprise-class capabilities (reliability, availability,
   manageability)

The NetApp EF-Series is an all-flash storage array that brings together
extreme performance and enterprise-grade reliability to create a system
optimized for latency-sensitive workloads. Building on a heritage of
performance leadership, its core architecture has been proven in the
world’s most demanding and complex computing environments. Its
field-proven design is the culmination of 20-years of industry knowledge
focused on designing enterprise-class storage. Leveraging experience
from nearly 1,000,000 systems shipped, the fully-redundant EF-Series
all-flash array is architected to provide the highest levels of
reliability, availability and data protection.

The E and EF-Series run on the enterprise-proven SANtricity software
platform. SANtricity is designed to combine sustainable, low-latency
performance with enterprise-class availability and protection. Its
streamlined firmware is well-suited for the extreme demands of
latency-sensitive workloads. And SANtricity helps keep I/O flowing with
automated path failover, online administration, advanced data
protection, proactive monitoring and repair, non-disruptive upgrades,
and extensive diagnostic capabilities.

E-Series’ Dynamic Disk Pools (DDP) provide an alternative to standard
RAID groups. They simplify protection by removing the complexity of
configuring RAID groups and allocating hot spares. Utilization is
improved by dynamically spreading data, parity, and spare capacity
across all drives in a pool, reducing performance bottlenecks due to
hot-spots. Additionally, should a drive failure occur, DDP enables
return to optimal state significantly faster than RAID6, while reducing
the performance impact during the reconstruction of a failed drive. DDP
also offers greater protection from multiple drive failures by
prioritizing the reconstruction of the most critical segments.
