*****************
Executive Summary
*****************

Most options for OpenStack integrated storage solutions aspire to offer
scalability, but often lack the features and performance needed for
efficient and cost-effective cloud deployment at scale. NetApp platforms
integrated with OpenStack avail a unique combination of advanced storage
efficiency, integrated data protection, and non-disruptive operations
with the ability to scale while preserving performance.

NetApp creates innovative storage and data management solutions that
help our customers accelerate business breakthroughs and achieve
outstanding cost efficiency. Our dedication to principles of simplicity,
innovation, and customer success has made us one of the fastest-growing
storage and data management providers today.

With NetApp, organizations can lower risk and enable a broad spectrum of
cloud SLAs by combining the power and ingenuity of OpenStack cloud
management with proven data integrity and fully-developed storage
provisioning, data protection, and efficiency.

By leveraging the power of the NetApp clustered Data ONTAP operating
system, enterprise organizations and service providers can build a cloud
storage platform with an agile data infrastructure that delivers
high-performing, efficient, and scalable open-source cloud services.
NetApp provides storage platforms that enable quick deployment, nimble
reaction to change with the ability to scale.

With capabilities such as self-healing and integrated data protection
for backup and disaster recovery, NetApp solutions are enterprise proven
and help reduce risk for OpenStack cloud deployments. A global network
of service provider partners already have deployed hundreds of high-SLA
cloud services built on NetApp with over a billion users worldwide.

Because NetApp technology is integrated with OpenStack Block Storage
Service, OpenStack Object Storage Service, OpenStack Image Service and
OpenStack Compute Service, users can build on this proven and highly
scalable storage platform to optimize their private and public cloud
architectures by reducing risk and increasing efficiency.

This document intends to describe the application of NetApp capabilities
to enable production OpenStack deployments. In particular, itâ€™s meant to
address the needs of system architects, system administrators, and
storage administrators who are investigating the use or deployment of
OpenStack.


**Authors and Contributors**

Rushi Agrawal, Sajid Akhtar, Tom Barron, Jon Benedict, Bob Callaway,
Robert Esker, Chuck Fouts, Jim Holl, Eric Johannes, Andrew Kerr, Clinton
Knight, Yogesh Kshirsagar, Sumit Kumar, Alex Meade, Jon Olby, Goutham
Pacha Ravi, Akshai Parthasarathy, Jose Porrua, Michael Price, Mike
Rooney, Dustin Schoenbrun, Navneet Singh, Stan Skelton, Tim Snider, Ben
Swartzlander, Marty Turner, Chad Morgenstern, Jennifer Yang
